add best practices on how to get near real-time data with dbt (#8478)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/best-practices/how-we-handle-real-time-data/2-incremental-patterns.md

---
title: "Incremental patterns for near real-time data"
id: "2-incremental-patterns"
description: Learn how to implement incremental models with MERGE, CDC, and microbatch strategies for near real-time data processing
hoverSnippet: Learn incremental patterns for near real-time data with dbt
---

This section covers three core incremental patterns for achieving near real-time data freshness:

1. [Incremental MERGE from append-only tables](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables)
2. [CDC with Snowflake Streams](#cdc-with-snowflake-streams)
3. [Microbatch for large time-series tables](#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables)

> ### Pattern 1: Incremental MERGE from append-only tables {#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables}

Reviewer: There's only one H2 on this page (the last section) and the rest of it is H3 and H4. Was that intentional?

Author: no def no intentional, good catch!

This pattern uses the `merge` incremental strategy to upsert new and updated rows into a target table. Most data platforms support the `merge` strategy. See the [supported incremental strategies by adapter](/docs/build/incremental-strategy#supported-incremental-strategies-by-adapter) for details.

"Append-only tables" refers to a data pattern where source data continuously receives new rows without updates or deletes.

> #### When to use the merge strategy

Reviewer: I think this sentence might be more beneficial to the reader if it were part of the opening statement rather than under an H4

Use this pattern when raw events continuously land into a staging table and you want a near real-time fact table updated every few minutes.

#### Example model

> In this example, let's assume you have raw events continuously landing into `raw.events` (using Snowpipe, Databricks Auto Loader, Kafka, or a similar ingestion mechanism) and you're looking for a near real‑time fact table `analytics.fct_events` updated every few minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, assume you have raw events continuously landing into `raw.events` (using Snowpipe, Databricks Auto Loader, Kafka, or a similar ingestion mechanism) and you're looking for a near real‑time fact table `analytics.fct_events` updated every few minutes.
```

> You'll configure the following sql model to make this work with the following configs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the SQL model with the following settings:
```

> - Use `incremental` filter to only scan rows newer than the latest timestamp already in the target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the `incremental` filter to only scan rows newer than the latest timestamp already in the target.
```

> - `incremental_strategy='merge'` with `unique_key=event_id` gives you idempotent upserts (inserts + updates).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use `incremental_strategy='merge'` with `unique_key=event_id` gives you idempotent upserts (inserts + updates).
```

> - Clustering by date using `cluster_by=['event_date']` helps with query pruning during `MERGE` operations (syntax varies by warehouse).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Cluster by date using `cluster_by=['event_date']` helps with query pruning during `MERGE` operations (syntax varies by warehouse).
```

> - Run this model every few minutes to achieve a freshness SLA measured in minutes, depending on ingestion and job scheduling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run the model every few minutes to achieve a freshness SLA measured in minutes, depending on ingestion and job scheduling.
```

> The following example uses Snowflake SQL syntax (`::`  type casting, `timestamp_ntz`, `cluster_by` config). Make sure you adapt the sql and clustering syntax for your warehouse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example uses Snowflake SQL syntax (`::`  type casting, `timestamp_ntz`, `cluster_by` config). Make sure you adapt the SQL and clustering syntax for your warehouse.
```

<File name="models/fct_events.sql">

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized = 'incremental',
    incremental_strategy = 'merge',         -- default on Snowflake
    unique_key = 'event_id',
    cluster_by = ['event_date']             -- helps MERGE performance (syntax varies by warehouse)
) }}

with source_events as (

    select
        event_id,
        event_ts::timestamp_ntz       as event_ts,  -- Snowflake syntax for type casting
        to_date(event_ts)             as event_date,
        user_id,
        event_type,
        payload
    from {{ source('raw', 'events') }}

    {% if is_incremental() %} 
      -- Only pull new/changed rows since last successful load
      where event_ts >
            (select max(event_ts) from {{ this }})
    {% endif %}

),

deduped as (

    -- optional: if the raw feed can produce duplicates
    select *
    from (
        select
            *,
            row_number() over (
                partition by event_id
                order by event_ts desc
            ) as _rn
        from source_events
    )
    where _rn = 1

)

select
    event_id,
    event_ts,
    event_date,
    user_id,
    event_type,
    payload
from deduped;
```
</File>

> #### Best practices

Reviewer: Should we bundle this section with the example
```suggestion
To ensure the best results:
```

- Use clustering keys wisely for better `MERGE` performance.
- Monitor `MERGE` performance as your table grows.
- Consider adding a lookback window (for example, `event_ts > max(event_ts) - interval '1 hour'`) to handle late-arriving data.

### Pattern 2: CDC with Snowflake Streams {#cdc-with-snowflake-streams}

> :::info Snowflake-specific pattern

Reviewer: Perhaps we should move this callout up top and call out that the examples in the whole guide are Snowflake-centric and they may have to make alterations for their specific warehouse (theres a similar case with the example above).

This pattern uses [Snowflake Streams](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/streams-intro), a Snowflake-specific feature. Other warehouses have similar change data capture (CDC) capabilities with different implementations.
 
Refer to the [additional resources](/best-practices/how-we-handle-real-time-data/3-warehouse-native-features#resources-by-warehouse) section for adapter-specific documentation.
:::

> This pattern leverages Snowflake's native CDC capabilities through Streams, which track changes (inserts, updates, deletes) to source tables.

Reviewer: If we leave the callout maybe we can combine this sentence with it since it's using a lot of the same language

> #### When to use CDC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use CDC when:
```

> - You have source tables that receive frequent updates (not just appends)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You have source tables that receive frequent updates (not just appends).
```

> - You need to capture both new records and changes to existing records

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You need to capture both new records and changes to existing records.
```

> - You want to avoid full table scans on large source tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You want to avoid full table scans on large source tables.
```

> #### Setup

Reviewer: Do we need an intro of any sort here - prerequisites or maybe a simple paragraph outlining what they're going through?

1. Create the stream (one-time, outside dbt):

```sql
create or replace stream RAW.EVENTS_STREAM
on table RAW.EVENTS;
```

2. Create a model consuming the stream:

> 

Reviewer: Can we put <file> blocks around these to help the reader

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized = 'incremental',
    incremental_strategy = 'merge',
    unique_key = 'event_id',
    cluster_by = ['event_date'],
    snowflake_warehouse = 'TRANSFORM_WH'
) }}

with changes as (

    select
        event_id,
        event_ts::timestamp_ntz        as event_ts,
        to_date(event_ts)              as event_date,
        user_id,
        event_type,
        payload,
        metadata$action                as change_type
    -- points at the STREAM, not the table
    from {{ source('raw', 'events_stream') }}

),

filtered as (

    select *
    from changes
    where change_type in ('INSERT', 'UPDATE')
    -- If you want to physically delete, you could also handle 'DELETE' here

)

select
    event_id,
    event_ts,
    event_date,
    user_id,
    event_type,
    payload
from filtered;
```

> #### Key differences from [pattern 1](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pattern distinctions
There are some key differences from [pattern 1](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables):
```

Author: love this!

> - Streams only return changed rows, so you don’t need an `is_incremental()` time filter. Each run just processes whatever changes are available at the moment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Streams only return changed rows, so you don’t need an `is_incremental()` time filter. Each run processes only the changes available at the moment.
```

- Run the model every few minutes to pull new changes and merge them into `fct_events`.

> - This gives you a CDC-style pipeline: Snowflake Streams capture changes, and dbt handles transformations, tests, and lineage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This gives you a CDC-style pipeline. Snowflake Streams captures changes, and dbt handles transformations, tests, and lineage.
```

### Pattern 3: Microbatch for large time-series tables {#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables}

> For large `fact` tables where backfills or long lookback windows are challenging, use `incremental_strategy='microbatch'` (available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.9 or higher and Latest release track in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />). Refer to [incremental microbatch](/docs/build/incremental-microbatch) for more details. Note that Microsoft Fabric doesn't support microbatch yet, [see the incremental strategy by adapter](/docs/build/incremental-strategy#supported-incremental-strategies-by-adapter) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For large `fact` tables where backfills or long lookback windows are challenging, use `iincremental_strategy='microbatch'` (available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.9 or higher and Latest release track in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />). Refer to [incremental microbatch](/docs/build/incremental-microbatch) for more details. Note that Microsoft Fabric doesn't support microbatch yet. See [incremental strategy by adapter](/docs/build/incremental-strategy#supported-incremental-strategies-by-adapter) for more details.
```

Author: when we configure incremental strategies in sql, they need to be wrapped in single quotes. so microbatch needs to be wrapped in quotes here. updating this to:

`incremental_strategy='microbatch',`

> #### When to use microbatch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use microbatch when:
```

- You have massive time-series tables (billions of rows)
- Backfills are slow and risky with traditional incremental approaches
- You need to reprocess data in manageable chunks
- Late-arriving data is common

:::info microbatch must have event_time

> Every upstream model feeding this microbatch model must also be configured with `event_time` so dbt can push time-filters upstream. Otherwise, each batch could re-scan full upstream tables.

Reviewer: This might be more helpful as part of the intro or after we show the model config example

:::

#### Model configuration

> ```sql

Reviewer: Same feedback as above about file name blocks

{{ config(
    materialized        = 'incremental',
    incremental_strategy= 'microbatch',
    event_time          = 'event_ts',   -- time column in this model
    batch_size          = 'hour',       -- process in hourly chunks
    lookback            = 1,            -- reprocess 1 prior batch to catch late data
    unique_key          = 'event_id',
    cluster_by          = ['event_date'],
    full_refresh        = false
) }}

select
    event_id,
    event_ts::timestamp_ntz   as event_ts,
    to_date(event_ts)         as event_date,
    user_id,
    event_type,
    payload
from {{ ref('stg_events') }};
```

#### Key behavior

> - Use microbatch for massive fact tables (clickstream, IoT, point-of-sale) with multi-year history

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use microbatch for massive fact tables (clickstream, IoT, point-of-sale) with multi-year history.
```

- No `is_incremental() block` needed &mdash; dbt automatically generates the appropriate `WHERE event_ts BETWEEN..` predicates per batch based on `event_time`, `batch_size`, `begin`, `lookback`, and so on.
- Each run processes multiple smaller queries (one per batch), making larger backfills safer and easier to retry.
- The `lookback` parameter automatically handles late-arriving data by reprocessing recent batches.
- Schedule jobs based on your service level agreement (SLA).

## Choosing the right incremental pattern

> You can choose the right incremental pattern based on your use case. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pattern you select will depend on your use case. Start with [pattern 1](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables) (`MERGE`), it's appropriate for most use cases. Upgrade to [pattern 2](#cdc-with-snowflake-streams) (use your data warehouse's native CDC features) when you need efficient CDC. Reach for [pattern 3](#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables) (Microbatch) when dealing with massive scale.
```

> For example, start with [pattern 1](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables) (`MERGE`) for most use cases. Upgrade to [pattern 2](#cdc-with-snowflake-streams) (use your data warehouse's native CDC features) when you need efficient CDC. Reach for [pattern 3](#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables) (Microbatch) when dealing with massive scale.

Reviewer: We could combine this with the opening sentence
```suggestion
```

> Here's a table to help you choose the right pattern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following table to help you choose the right pattern:
```

| Pattern | Best for | Key benefit |
| ------- | -------- | ----------- |
| `merge` from append-only | Most standard use cases | Simple, widely understood |
| CDC with Streams | Tables with frequent updates | Efficient change capture |
| Microbatch | Massive time-series tables | Safe backfills, late-data handling |

> For more information, refer to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Related docs
```

---
title: "Incremental patterns for near real-time data"
id: "2-incremental-patterns"
description: Learn how to implement incremental models with MERGE, CDC, and microbatch strategies for near real-time data processing
hoverSnippet: Learn incremental patterns for near real-time data with dbt
---

This section covers three core incremental patterns for achieving near real-time data freshness:

1. [Incremental MERGE from append-only tables](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables)
2. [CDC with Snowflake Streams](#cdc-with-snowflake-streams)
3. [Microbatch for large time-series tables](#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables)

:::info Snowflake-specific pattern

> Some patterns on this guide uses Snowflake-specific features. Other warehouses have similar features with different implementations.  Refer to the [additional resources](/best-practices/how-we-handle-real-time-data/3-warehouse-native-features#resources-by-warehouse) section for adapter-specific documentation.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some patterns on this guide uses Snowflake-specific features. Other warehouses have similar features with different implementations. Refer to the [additional resources](/best-practices/how-we-handle-real-time-data/3-warehouse-native-features#resources-by-warehouse) section for adapter-specific documentation.  
```

:::

## Pattern 1: Incremental MERGE from append-only tables {#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables}

> This pattern uses the `merge` incremental strategy to upsert new and updated rows into a target table. Most data platforms support the `merge` strategy. See the [supported incremental strategies by adapter](/docs/build/incremental-strategy#supported-incremental-strategies-by-adapter) for details.

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to add this here since this is the first `upsert` in the page
```suggestion
This pattern uses the `merge` incremental strategy to upsert (insert + update) new and updated rows into a target table. Most data platforms support the `merge` strategy. See the [supported incremental strategies by adapter](/docs/build/incremental-strategy#supported-incremental-strategies-by-adapter) for details.
```

"Append-only tables" refers to a data pattern where source data continuously receives new rows without updates or deletes.

> #### When to use the merge strategy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### When to use the merge strategy
```

Use this pattern when raw events continuously land into a staging table and you want a near real-time fact table updated every few minutes.

> #### Example model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Example model
```

In this example, assume you have raw events continuously landing into `raw.events` (using Snowpipe, Databricks Auto Loader, Kafka, or a similar ingestion mechanism) and you're looking for a near real‑time fact table `analytics.fct_events` updated every few minutes.

Configure the SQL model with the following settings:

- Use the `incremental` filter to only scan rows newer than the latest timestamp already in the target.

> - Use `incremental_strategy='merge'` with `unique_key=event_id` gives you idempotent upserts (inserts + updates).

Reviewer 2: Should this be:
```suggestion
- Use `incremental_strategy='merge'` with `unique_key=event_id` to give you idempotent upserts (inserts + updates).
```

- Cluster by date using `cluster_by=['event_date']` helps with query pruning during `MERGE` operations (syntax varies by warehouse).

> - Run the model every few minutes to achieve a freshness SLA measured in minutes, depending on ingestion and job scheduling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Run the model every few minutes to achieve a freshness service level agreement (SLA) measured in minutes, depending on ingestion and job scheduling.
```

        event_ts::timestamp_ntz       as event_ts,  -- Snowflake syntax for type casting
        to_date(event_ts)             as event_date,
        user_id,
        event_type,
        payload
    from {{ source('raw', 'events') }}

    {% if is_incremental() %} 
      -- Only pull new/changed rows since last successful load
      where event_ts >
            (select max(event_ts) from {{ this }})
    {% endif %}

),

deduped as (

    -- optional: if the raw feed can produce duplicates
    select *
    from (
        select
            *,
            row_number() over (
                partition by event_id
                order by event_ts desc
            ) as _rn
        from source_events
    )
    where _rn = 1

)

select
    event_id,
    event_ts,
    event_date,
    user_id,
    event_type,
    payload
from deduped;
```
</File>

To ensure the best results:

- Use clustering keys wisely for better `MERGE` performance.
- Monitor `MERGE` performance as your table grows.
- Consider adding a lookback window (for example, `event_ts > max(event_ts) - interval '1 hour'`) to handle late-arriving data.

## Pattern 2: CDC with Snowflake Streams {#cdc-with-snowflake-streams}

> This pattern leverages Snowflake's native CDC capabilities through [Streams](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/streams-intro), a Snowflake-specific feature which tracks changes (inserts, updates, deletes) to source tables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This pattern leverages Snowflake's native Change Data Capture (CDC) capabilities through [Streams](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/streams-intro), a Snowflake-specific feature which tracks changes (inserts, updates, deletes) to source tables.
```

> Use CDC when:

Reviewer 2: The other patterns have a `When to use` header, suggesting we also use one here for consistency:

```suggestion
### When to use CDC

Use CDC when:
```

Author: agreed! @matthewshaver suggested this https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8478#discussion_r2734927065 but agreed that i prefer the header.

- You have source tables that receive frequent updates (not just appends).
- You need to capture both new records and changes to existing records.
- You want to avoid full table scans on large source tables.

> #### Setup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setup
```

- Run the model every few minutes to pull new changes and merge them into `fct_events`.
- This gives you a CDC-style pipeline. Snowflake Streams captures changes, and dbt handles transformations, tests, and lineage.

## Pattern 3: Microbatch for large time-series tables {#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables}

For large `fact` tables where backfills or long lookback windows are challenging, use `iincremental_strategy='microbatch'` (available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.9 or higher and Latest release track in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />). Refer to [incremental microbatch](/docs/build/incremental-microbatch) for more details. Note that Microsoft Fabric doesn't support microbatch yet. See [incremental strategy by adapter](/docs/build/incremental-strategy#supported-incremental-strategies-by-adapter) for more details.

:::info microbatch must have event_time

Every upstream model feeding this microbatch model must also be configured with `event_time` so dbt can push time-filters upstream. Otherwise, each batch could re-scan full upstream tables.
:::

> #### When to use microbatch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### When to use microbatch
```

> - You have massive time-series tables (billions of rows)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You have massive time-series tables (billions of rows).
```

> - Backfills are slow and risky with traditional incremental approaches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Backfills are slow and risky with traditional incremental approaches.
```

> - You need to reprocess data in manageable chunks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You need to reprocess data in manageable chunks.
```

> - Late-arriving data is common

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Late-arriving data is common.
```

> #### Model configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Model configuration
```

Let's say you have a `fact_events` table with a `event_ts` column and you want to process it in hourly chunks. You can configure the model as follows:

<File name="models/fct_events_microbatch.sql">

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized        = 'incremental',
    incremental_strategy= 'microbatch',
    event_time          = 'event_ts',   -- time column in this model
    batch_size          = 'hour',       -- process in hourly chunks
    lookback            = 1,            -- reprocess 1 prior batch to catch late data
    unique_key          = 'event_id',
    cluster_by          = ['event_date'],
    full_refresh        = false
) }}

select
    event_id,
    event_ts::timestamp_ntz   as event_ts,
    to_date(event_ts)         as event_date,
    user_id,
    event_type,
    payload
from {{ ref('stg_events') }};
```
</File>

> #### Key behavior

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Key behavior
```

- Use microbatch for massive fact tables (clickstream, IoT, point-of-sale) with multi-year history.
- No `is_incremental() block` needed &mdash; dbt automatically generates the appropriate `WHERE event_ts BETWEEN..` predicates per batch based on `event_time`, `batch_size`, `begin`, `lookback`, and so on.
- Each run processes multiple smaller queries (one per batch), making larger backfills safer and easier to retry.
- The `lookback` parameter automatically handles late-arriving data by reprocessing recent batches.

> - Schedule jobs based on your service level agreement (SLA).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Schedule jobs based on your SLA.
```

## Choosing the right incremental pattern

> The pattern you select will depend on your use case. Start with [pattern 1](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables) (`MERGE`), it's appropriate for most use cases. Upgrade to [pattern 2](#cdc-with-snowflake-streams) (use your data warehouse's native CDC features) when you need efficient CDC. Reach for [pattern 3](#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables) (Microbatch) when dealing with massive scale.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pattern you select will depend on your use case. Start with [pattern 1](#incremental-merge-from-append-only-tables) (`MERGE`), since it's appropriate for most use cases. Upgrade to [pattern 2](#cdc-with-snowflake-streams) (use your data warehouse's native CDC features) when you need efficient CDC. Reach for [pattern 3](#microbatch-for-large-time-series-tables) (Microbatch) when dealing with massive scale.
```
